and we should be rock and roll hello
there my name is Jay I'm one of the
expert IELTS teachers here at e2
language now if you're doing IELTS
speaking the second part of IELTS
speaking is a bit tricky it's
particularly tricky because well you
have to speak for two whole minutes and
you're you have one minute to prepare to
do that so speaking for two minutes is
tough on a sort of mundane boring topic
so you need to learn how to use that 1
minute preparation time effectively if
you do use that time effectively and if
you do have a good strategy you can not
only speak for 2 minutes but you can
speak in such a way that you use a
variety of verb tenses and vocabulary
and grammar that will satisfy the IELTS
examiner as long as your pronunciation
and oral fluency are clear then you can
definitely get a high score so in this
class we're going to look at IELTS
speaking part 2 and I'm gonna teach you
how to prepare for the topic I'm gonna
teach you how to prepare for your 2
minute monologue ok so what happens is
on test day you first of all you meet
the examiner you sit down he or she asks
for your passport and some details and
then you have Part 1 which is just small
talk the examiner will ask you some
questions about where you're from and
what you do and it's very
straightforward part 2 this is what will
happen the IELTS examiner will give you
a task card which looks like this by the
way and you'll have one minute to
prepare and two minutes to speak that
one minute preparation time is
absolutely critical in order to speak
for two minutes well okay so this is the
task card now imagine that this was what
was given to you on test of it says talk
about an occasion when you helped
someone you should say who helped who
you helped why you helped him or her who
was with you and explain whether the
person appreciated it or not whoa
alright so you sit there you've got one
minute to prepare and you think to
yourself oh my god what am I going to
talk about oh I've got
story I did help somebody once and
before you know it the one minutes up
and the IELTS examiner says okay you can
start now and you think whoa okay and
what are you going to do I'm gonna teach
you a really cool effective three-part
strategy and we're going to learn how to
prepare so I want you on test day to
tell three stories not one you're gonna
tell three stories of three different
occasions when you help somebody and
it's called PPF and the reason is you're
gonna tell a story about when you help
someone in the past when you help
somebody recently in the present and
when you help somebody when you will
help somebody in the future okay so the
past present future past story on this
topic a present story on this topic and
a future story on this topic but it says
someone as in one person you helped as
in past tense so can you actually use
this strategy well the answer is yes you
can use this strategy all right so I
don't want to get too technical with you
but the IELTS speaking has what's called
criteria so if I'm an IELTS speaking
examiner I'm marking you on four things
okay four things I'm going to show you
what those four things up now I've
spoken to IELTS examiner's and I've
asked them is it okay to tell three
stories not one and they say absolutely
fine
because there's no criterion criteria
that says you must speak on topic okay
you have to you have to speak about
helping somebody but if you tell three
stories it's absolutely fine okay so let
me show you that in detail because I
want you to believe me because this
actually works so if we look here first
of all if you get time you can pause
this video and you can read this this is
from an IELTS examiner this is what the
ayats examiner wrote to me so it's true
now in also if you see up here
these are the criteria fluency and
coherence which means structure lexical
resource which means vocabulary grammar
and pronunciation these are the criteria
on which your mark there's nothing about
speaking on the task okay so you need to
trust me on this one this works but I
don't have three stories about helping
people
well you can make up the three stories
based loosely on past experiences here's
another little critical thing about
IELTS speaking you don't have to tell
the truth this is a language exam you
can talk about a story that happened to
your brother or something you saw on TV
and you can pretend that you did it it
doesn't really matter you're not there
to tell the truth you're there just to
use your language and telling stories or
stories aren't often true are they
they're often fictional or made-up
that's fine don't feel guilty about
telling lies in this exam because you're
not telling lies you're telling stories
it's a different thing altogether so yes
you need to make up the three stories if
you don't have three and you can base
them loosely on past experiences I'll
show you how to do that in Excel let in
fact let me show you now here's an
example so this task card says again
talk about an occasion when you help
someone you should say who you helped
why you helped him or her who was with
you and explain whether the person
appreciate it or not okay so let's say
the time now is ticking down 59 58 so
what I need to do now is I need to think
okay past a story when I help somebody
in the past okay yes I remember when I
was a kid yes I hoped that that old
woman carry her shopping yes come on
whoops why did that stop come back
anyway there we go it's still ticking
present story what am i doing recently
who if I helped recently oh I helped a
guy this morning who dropped his wallet
that's right
okay find a future story who do I want
to help in the future well maybe I could
if I if I gave money to a charity I
could help somebody blah blah blah look
at that
in 30 seconds I've come up with my three
stories so here's my hero my stories
here in the past I helped an old woman
carry her shopping in the present well
recently this morning I helped a man who
dropped his wallet in the future I would
like to help people through through a
charity in which I give money and all I
do is I hold this task card in my hand
and I glance down in it as I'm speaking
you don't even have to look at the
examiner to be honest it's not about
body language I can just look at this
task card and go okay so let's go
through it so in the past I would like
to tell you three stories in the past I
helped an old woman carry her shopping
she was walking home and I could see
that she needed help with the shopping
because it was heavy at the at the time
I was staying with my grandmother and I
was just a young boy I was only about
twelve years old
bla bla bla why did I help him or her I
helped her because the shopping was
really heavy and I could see that she
was struggling and because I was young
and kid I could definitely help her
carry that shopping bla bla bla bla bla
who was with you interestingly I had two
friends with me at the time but they
didn't want to help because they were
busy skateboarding bla bla bla bla bla
explain whether the person appreciated
or not she appreciated him enormous ly
in fact she gave me ten dollars for
carrying helping her carry home shopping
bla bla bla bla bla present story do the
same thing about the man who dropped his
wallet I start here again and I go
through here and here let's do some
practice I can see that you want to do
this so practice one I'm going to give
you a task card just like in the IELTS
exam I'm gonna give you one minute I
want you to read that task card and
think of three stories if you have a pen
and paper please write down your three
stories okay let's do this after that I
want you to do the speaking for two
minutes on the topic and tell the three
stories past present future story the
past story will
use past tense verbs in the past I
helped a woman carry her shopping she
was blah-blah-blah-blah-blah present
story see if you can use present
continuous or present perfect continuous
recently I have been helping people by
giving money to a charity the people
receive the money every week present
verbs and see if you can also whoops
sorry just let me check something I've
just been logged out of my webinar have
I any ok oh good oh good
hello people on YouTube by the way if
you're enjoying this please click like
and leave a comment I'll get to your
questions in a second I think it's all
good
and a future story you need to tell a
future story if you have time if you
have time you can say in the future I
would like to and you will use lots of
modal verbs etc ok so let's practice
let's prepare ready
you
okay you should now have three stories
about a city I know it says a city you
recently visited in the past but again
it doesn't matter you can discuss three
stories one pass one present one future
okay so let me show you mine and then
we're going to actually practice this so
for me I'm going to talk about these
three cities I'm going to talk about how
in the past I visited a city called
Mysore in India recently I visited
Mexico City okay
now present tense verbs or I could even
take recently well or at the moment at
the moment I live in Melbourne for
example so I can make that present tense
verbs if you can in the future I would
like to visit New York okay they're my
three city so you should have three
cities to now just before we practice it
I want to teach you an introductory
sentence that you can use on testing
today I would like to talk about three
different cities today I would like to
talk about three different inventions
sports rules plans whatever that topic
is you can memorize this sentence and so
you don't have to be nervous you can
look at the examiner after you've made
your plan for three things we'll talk
about you look the examiner in the eye
you say today I would like to talk about
three different cities okay here we go
two minutes to talk about your three
cities starting now
you
okay that's two minutes and you can see
or feel or experience two minutes is a
long time to talk about one story tough
really tough right did you experience
that just type into the comments if you
will what you thought while you were
doing that was that was that easy or an
arena has a good question there in
duress can we tell two stories about the
past certainly yes but the problem is
you'll just be using past tense verbs I
want you to use present tense verbs as
well and future tense verbs because then
your grammar and your vocabulary go up
that's why we do this somebody said in
YouTube are you sure we can do this it
only says recently visited yes you can
trust me on this you need to trust me
it's fine you can do the research
yourself if you want you can absolutely
use that okay so if I see it says if I
tell one story it goes for 30 seconds
right and you need to go for two minutes
that's why this is tough what a lot of
people doing IELTS speaking this is a
huge mistake and examiner's see this
every day
they tell one story for 30 seconds and
then they tell the same story again and
then again and again until they run out
and they just keep going around in
circles saying the same thing because
it's really hard to talk for two minutes
that one topic here's a question three
stories
gives a lot to tip say in two minutes
good well let's just let's just keep
practicing it okay let's do another one
let's do another one practice - let's do
the same thing I'm gonna give you
another prompt I want you to prepare for
one minute by thinking about three
different stories but yes yes yes let's
prepare ready
cool how did you go preparing for that
topic about an invention again talk
about an invention in the past that you
can let me just show you mine let me
show you mine this is what came to my
mind so I thought okay an important
invention well telephones and I'll talk
about well what the invention is it's a
telephone it's for talking for people to
people across the world and it's
connected by wires and blah blah blah
blah blah who invented it Alexander Bell
invented it in and again do I know who
invented the telephone and in what year
and we're not really I'm just gonna lie
I'm just gonna say it was invented by
Alexander Balance 1763 in London England
is that true no it's beside the point
you don't lose marks for being
inaccurate in terms of the content okay
they're worried about your language the
examiners listening to your language so
I'm just gonna make it up to my recent
story at the moment I have been using
facebook facebook is the best invention
of the 21st century it was invented by
Mark Zuckerberg whose
blah-blah-blah-blah-blah future in the
future I think an important invention
that will happen will be the creation of
robots
especially robots that help us clean the
house okay just before you start I've
just realized that there are two ways
you can say recently or you can say
sorry at the moment at the moment
bla bla bla ba ba okay at the moment so
there's two ways to do the present story
two minutes to speak the time starts now
you
all right good how did you go then
please just for my interest give
yourself a score out of nine you're an
IELTS one two three four just type into
the chat what you believe you should
have scored there so advice it says
seven who else eight Hina's given an
eight that's good
nice the Z says seven sad face alright
people are giving themselves seven seven
point five fine that's that's good
that's good that's good now a few good
questions came through then on YouTube
Sarah said what if we have to talk about
our family how do we make a past present
and future story about our family I
agree look I'll be perfectly honest with
you this technique will work for about
95 percent of tasks but sometimes you
will get a task card that says talk
about your family and then it's like oh
okay
but just remember that you can apply
this strategy even to your family for
example you can talk about your
grandmother in the past or something
like that you talk about your your your
your sister's baby in the present then
you can talk about in the future how you
would like to have a big family or
whatever it is
remember you can tape that task and you
can manipulate it to suit you okay
remember you're just being marked on
those four things pronunciation a
structure I'm trying to figure for them
actually vocabulary and grammar okay
you're not being marked on whether you
speak on task it's different to the
essay with the essay and academic
writing task 1 and general writing task
1 you must absolutely talk about the
topic this no it's different
cool somebody's also asked if I can do
one so maybe I'll do one at the end okay
but I just want you to practice for the
time being preparing and speaking let's
do another one
here we go
you have one minute to prepare
you
okay just quickly here are mine notes
that I took so in the past I played
cricket recently I have been rock
climbing and in the future I will play
tennis
they are my three stories so here we go
you have two minutes now to talk just
speak about your three stories
you
how did you go that time give yourself a
score out of nine now what I'm going to
do now is I'm going to do one I haven't
practiced this before so I'm doing it
for the first time and you'll hear that
even though I'm a native speaker and an
English teacher I might probably stumble
and restart sentences you don't have to
be perfect okay don't have to be perfect
the other thing is I might get a little
bit nervous in doing this okay so that's
completely natural as well it's an
extremely difficult task there's a lot
of pressure on you you just have to be
strong and focus on what you say so let
me do this again I'm gonna speak now for
two minutes and you'll hear me do this
so let me start the timer today I would
like to talk about three different
stories about my favorite sport I'm
gonna tell you a past story I'm going to
talk about the sport that I'm currently
playing at the moment and I'll also talk
about a sport that I would like to play
in the future so let's have a look at
this
so the sport that I used to play in the
past was cricket I played in the
under-15s
a tournament at my local school and to
be perfectly honest I wasn't very good
at it there are really complicated rules
with cricket it you need a lip and
players on the field it has all these
crazy terminology about ducks and buys
and LBW and whatnot crickets usually
played in summer but we also played it
in winter and we would play indoors
which in fact I preferred playing
indoors because we got to use a tennis
ball instead of a cricket ball I'm not
sure if you're familiar but cricket
balls are extremely hard and dangerous
but anyway unlike cricket I particularly
liked bowling more recently I've been
rock climbing which I'm not exactly sure
if it's a sport or not but that's been
extremely interesting basically what you
have to do is just climb up a wall using
your own strength there aren't really
any rules with rock climbing the only
really rule there is is to make sure you
don't fall in and be safe and you often
do it with a partner
because they look after you and you can
rock climb any time of the year whether
it be winter or summer because you do it
indoors I really like it because it's
dangerous and it gives me a great thrill
in the future I would like to play
tennis I really like tennis but I
haven't played it much usually you can
play with one other person or two other
people and although it's usually a
summer sport you can play it at other
times I like tennis because it seems to
be very elegant I'll be perfectly honest
with you my heart's beating a little bit
fast because all you guys are watching
me but there you go I just told the
three story and I had no trouble
speaking for two minutes I had heaps to
say okay I told the past story about
cricket prison story about rock climbing
future story about tennis I used a range
of vocabulary because I had to because
in the past I used past tense verbs
present in I have been rock climbing for
example and in the future I used a lot
of modal verbs like would would like to
might should for example I think I use
some modal verbs like that so anyway
good there you go that's an example
let's do another one here we go one
minute to prepare
you
okay let's look at how what I did to
prepare so a past rule is talk about a
school rule this is a hard one this is
difficult what the rule is why it exists
what happens when it is broken explain
whether it is effective so in the past
so I'm gonna talk about I would say when
I was in primary school we had a rule
that was you could not speak in class
you weren't allowed to talk only the
teacher is allowed to talk this rule
exists because the idea is to keep the
class quiet so you can hear the teacher
bla bla bla bla bla
past tense recently recently I think
texting has become a big problem
somebody asked me before what sort of
verbs you can use here so has your gonna
use the present perfect like has become
school students have been texting
they're gonna use present perfect
continuous etc so there's different
verbs here I've done another lesson if
you're interested I've done a few more
lessons on this so if you want to watch
them you can click here or search
wherever it is to look at the different
verb tenses you use okay now again this
is a tough one in the future one of the
rules might be that you cannot use
Google in exams maybe there will be
technology where you can cheat in exam
so that will become a school rule this
is hard let's try to do this I'm gonna
give you two minutes to speak now about
this topic three stories here we go
you
oh okay how did you go just type into
the chat how you went with that one Lord
you give yourself out of nine what's
course yeah she'd said very hard I agree
interesting what's what score would you
give yourself
6.5 ohina did well well done eight good
alright alright good
alright people are raving themselves
very highly so that's a that's a good
sign means that you're doing this well
cool good stuff good stuff we're gonna
do one more this is the final one okay
really want you to I want to be
confident with this one now you've
practiced this method enough you know
how to manipulate the task card to suit
you now I want you to speak very clearly
okay so you have one minute to prepare
okay you have two minutes to speak now
[Music]
okay that one that one's real I got
these task cards from Crete students who
have taken the IELTS and actually
remembered what the task card was so
this is this you could see this in your
exam this is how difficult it can become
this is really hard I want to talk to
you about how I would prepare for this
one okay so talk about a plan that never
happened
should say what the plan was why it
didn't happen
who the plan involved and explain
whether it might happen again so this is
my plan so in the past when I was a kid
when I was young I wanted to build a
tree house
okay that was what the plan was but it
didn't happen because we ran we didn't
have any wood now again I'm going to lie
I'm gonna tell a story I'm not gonna
tell the truth because I don't really
have a story here and I'm not gonna sit
there silently because I want to get a
high score and pass the IELTS and move
on with my life
so I'm gonna make this story up a little
bit so I'm gonna tell one about building
a tree house when I was a kid a plan
that never happened
more recently or at the moment I have
been intending to visit my family
however I've been working too much and
so it hasn't really happened it's
happened again because I've been working
too much it involves well just me and my
colleagues at work but largely involved
in this bla bla bla bla bla in the
future I would like to do a PhD but it
probably won't happen okay again I'm I'm
being creative with this task card I'm
thinking things that plans that I want
to do it which probably won't happen etc
this is this is tough this is tough but
this is the level of difficulty that you
might receive in your exam so you need
to be prepared okay
we did that so why IELTS nine why IELTS
nine I want to talk to you again about
the scoring again there are four things
that your scored on this is the this is
the official IELTS korek scorecard fluid
seeing coherence lexical resource
grammatical range and accuracy and
pronunciation
in other words fluency and structure
vocabulary grammar pronunciation and
structure means structure does not mean
speaking on topic structure means that
you say today I would like to talk about
this blah blah blah blah and you
structure your your story while going
through those dot points okay fluency
means how easily the words come to you
how easily you can speak without
hesitating and pausing and umming and
ahhing etc vocabulary means that you
have the words to describe what you're
trying to say Rama means that you use
them accurately and pronunciation means
that the sounds you're making a clear to
that these four things are really five
there's one two three four five things
of what you scored on to get your your
seven or your eight or maybe even your
nine okay this is what your scored on
cool guys if you need any help with your
IELTS please just go to WWE two language
comm we have a full online course we
have methods for writing and speaking
and reading lots of practice we have
live class to sign up to the live
classes below it from the description
below yeah cool hope that was helpful I
think with the IELTS speaking it really
is practice you sort of think oh that's
easy speak for two minutes try it on
test day when you're under pressure
whole new ballgame
anyway I'll uh leave it there I'll just
answer a few questions in the webinar
now so if you guys have any questions
okay somebody says I'm getting stuck
talking about the future when you talk
about the future you need to use mobile
verb so you need to use words like would
might will these sorts of words help you
to talk about the future
for example let's say it's a book that
you will read in the future let's say
the topics about a book you can say a
book that I would like to read in the
future is called Harry Potter by JK
Rowling I would like to read this
because it's really interesting maybe
next week I will find the time to read
this book whatever I'm using will would
might for example yeah cool ok here's
another great question Jane what happens
when you only have 15 seconds left for
your future story that's fine that's
fine if you only have 15 seconds you can
just say and lastly I'll talk about the
book that I would like to read in the
future which is a Harry Potter I would
like to read this because many of my
friends have read it and they told me
it's fantastic that's it just for just a
little a little structure a little story
on the future it doesn't matter so the
past story will go for 40 should go for
about 45 seconds present story go for
about 45 seconds that leaves you about
30 seconds for the Future story if you
don't have time for the Future story
it doesn't matter that's fine past and
present will be fine just remember with
the present story there are two ways to
start you can say the word recently
which will make you say present perfect
verbs or you can say at the moment which
will make you say present continuous
verbs okay
[Music]
okay yeah cool
anyway requires practice need help check
out the website see you guys later good
luck good luck good luck
you